JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: U.S.
suicide rates climb to a 30-year
high, especially among
young girls. We examine
this disturbing trend.
Also ahead, extending the right
to vote in Virginia. An
executive order restores voting
rights to convicted felons.
Then, on this Earth Day: efforts
by famed biologist and father of
biodiversity E.O.
Wilson to save
Alabama's river delta.
E.O. WILSON, Biologist: We have
only discovered, much less
studied, about 20 percent of all
the species. So, here is a world
that is waiting for exploration,
and that's just the beginning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to analyze the week's
news.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It took all day,
but more than 170 countries
signed the landmark Paris accord
on climate change today. The
ceremony took place at the
United Nations in New York.
Secretary
of State John Kerry signed for
the United States, with his
granddaughter joining him.
Beforehand, he acknowledged the
deal falls short of its stated
goal.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: The power of this
agreement is not that it, in and
of
itself, guarantees that we will
actually hold the increase of
temperature to the target
of 1.5 degrees or 2 degrees
Centigrade. In fact, it doesn't.
And we know that. We acknowledge
it. The power of this agreement
is the opportunity that it
creates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Each nation will
set nonbinding targets for
cutting emissions of carbon
dioxide
and other gases by 2025. The
U.S. target is up to 28 percent
below 2005 levels.
A new earthquake hit off the
coast of Ecuador last night,
followed by a smaller
aftershock,
but there were no reports of new
damage. Still, the official
death toll from last Saturday's
quake rose again to 587.
Survivors are now lining up
daily for food and fresh water,
as aid workers warn of delays in
distributing the supplies. And a
new risk has emerged,
the threat of
mosquito-borne illness.
The U.S. presidential candidates
are heading into another big
weekend, the last before
the next batch of primaries. For
Republican front-runner Donald
Trump today, that meant
hunting for votes and trying
to win over party big-wigs.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: Donald Trump's
campaign proceeded on two
fronts. The candidate stumped in
Delaware.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: My family asked me,
dad, why are you doing
this? I would rather not do it.
I wish we had somebody that was
so good. I don't care
if it's a Republican or a
Democrat. I couldn't care less.
JOHN YANG: In Florida, a top
campaign official tried to ease
the concerns of members of the
Republican National Committee.
Senior adviser Paul Manafort
described the candidate almost
as an actor playing a role.
The New York Times obtained
a recording of his remarks.
PAUL MANAFORT, Trump Convention
Manager: And that's what's
important, from our standpoint,
for you to understand that he
gets it, and that the part he's
been playing is evolving
into the part that now that you
have been expecting that he
wasn't ready for, because
he had first to complete the
first phase. The negatives will
come down. The image is
going to change.
JOHN YANG: Ted Cruz pounced on
those comments. Campaigning in
Williamsport, Pennsylvania,
today, he branded Trump
and his team as liars.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Yesterday, they were down in
Florida meeting
with party leaders, and they
were saying -- these are their
words -- that all of this is
just
a show, that he doesn't believe
anything he's saying. He's just
trying to fool gullible
voters, and he's not going to do
any of it, he's not going to
build a wall, he's not going
to deport anyone. He is
telling us he's lying to us.
JOHN YANG: In the Democratic
race, Bernie Sanders is
celebrating praise from Vice
President
Joe Biden. While not making an
endorsement, Mr. Biden told The
New York Times he preferred
Sanders' approach.
He said: "I like the idea of
saying, we can do much more,
because we can."
Today, Sanders held a town hall
in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate: My hope
is there will be a
record-breaking
turnout on Tuesday.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Clinton also
campaigned in Pennsylvania,
focusing on pay equity, citing
the decision
to put a woman on the $20 bill.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: I'm very
excited about Harriet Tubman and
the other women who are going to
be included on our money. But I
also want to make sure
that women are making the money.
JOHN YANG: Pennsylvania is the
biggest prize among the five
states that vote on Tuesday.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In London today,
President Obama called for
overturning North Carolina's
new law on public bathrooms. It
limits transgender people to the
facility that corresponds to
their sex at birth.
Mr. Obama said the law is wrong,
but he emphasized that Britons
are welcome to visit. The
British
government has issued a travel
advisory warning of possible
discrimination in some U.S.
states.
The president also weighed in
one Britain's upcoming vote on
whether to leave the European
Union. He penned an op-ed
article in The Daily Telegraph,
writing -- quote -- "The U.S.
and
the world need your outsized
influence to continue, including
within Europe."
Later, he followed up on his
appeal at a news conference with
Prime Minister David Cameron.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: Part of our
special relationship, part of
being friends it is to be honest
and to let you know what I
think.
And, speaking honestly, the
outcome of that decision is a
matter of deep interest to the
United States, because it
affects our prospects as well.
The United States wants a strong
United Kingdom as a partner, and
the United Kingdom is at its
best when it's helping to
lead a strong Europe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
also warned that the U.S. would
be in no hurry to write a free
trade deal with Britain
if it does exit the E.U.
But the candor wasn't
appreciated by some, including
London Mayor Boris Johnson, who
heads the Leave campaign.
BORIS JOHNSON, Mayor of London:
It's something to which the
Americans would never submit
their own democracy. America is
a proud democracy, built on
principles of liberty, the idea
of
the sanctity of representation
and no taxation without
representation. It is very odd.
It
is perverse. It is hypocritical.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Johnson also
blasted the president's decision
to move a bust of Winston
Churchill
from the Oval Office. He called
it -- quote -- "a symbol of the
part-Kenyan president's
ancestral dislike of
the British empire."
President Obama didn't respond
directly to the jibe, but he did
say that he moved the
Churchill bust to his private
study after he had a bust of
Martin Luther King Jr. placed
in the Oval Office.
The United States announced
today that it's buying roughly
35 tons of so-called heavy
water from Iran. The liquid is
used to make weapons-grade
plutonium, and last year's
nuclear
deal calls for Iran to sell its
excess stockpile. Republican
leaders in Congress today
criticized
the purchase as a
dangerous precedent.
The number of migrants arriving
in Greece is rising again. The
International Organization
for Migration says more than 150
people reached the Greek islands
from Turkey on each of the
last three days. Initially, a
European Union deal with Turkey
had cut arrivals to near
zero.
Back in this country, medical
officials completed an autopsy
on Prince, but said it could
take
weeks to fix the cause of death.
The pop music great was found
dead yesterday at his home
in suburban Minneapolis.
Today, as an impromptu memorial
swelled with balloons and
flowers, investigators said some
points are already clear.
JIM OLSON, Carver County,
Minnesota, Sheriff: There were
no obvious signs of trauma on
the
body at all.
We have no reason to believe at
this point that this was a
suicide, but, again, this
early on in this investigation
and it's continuing to -- we
will continue to investigate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The sheriff and
the medical examiner's office
wouldn't confirm or deny
reports that Prince might have
overdosed on painkillers last
week.
Wall Street ended the week with
a lackluster day. The Dow Jones
industrial average gained
21 points to close at 18003. But
the Nasdaq fell 39, and the S&P
500 added just a fraction.
For the week, the Dow and the
Nasdaq gained half-a-percent.
The S&P lost more than
half-a-percent.
And thousands of people have
gathered in Boston this weekend
for PAX East, one of the world's
leading gaming festivals.
Organizers say it's like
Woodstock for gamers, where
serious players
can compete and preview what's
new. The buzz this year is all
about virtual reality games
that use headsets to transport
users to alternate worlds.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
an alarming rise in suicide
rates, including among teenage
girls; Virginia's governor
explains why 200,000 felons can
now vote in November; Mark
Shields
and David Brooks analyze the
week's news; fighting the terror
group Al-Shabaab in a
propaganda war; and much more.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The government
released new statistics about
suicide in the U.S., and
the results were sobering and
stunning. The nation's suicide
rate is at its highest point
since 1986. Nearly 43,000 people
ended their own lives in 2014,
which is the most recent
year with full data.
Hari Sreenivasan has more on
this story from our New York
studios.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The rise in
rates were particularly alarming
among some age groups. While the
numbers are still smaller among
children, the suicide rate was
up sharply among
10-to-14-year-old
girls, tripling in
the past 15 years.
It also rose steeply among
middle-aged Americans, 63
percent higher for middle-aged
women, 43
percent higher for
middle-aged men.
For some perspective on these
trends and some of the potential
reasons behind it, I'm joined
by Katherine Hempstead, who
studies this for the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation.
For the record, the foundation
is a funder of the "NewsHour."
So, which of these sets of
numbers, and we just went over a
couple of them, but stood
out to you when you saw this?
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD, Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation: Well, I
think there has been concern
about
the middle-aged group
for a while now.
And people have been noticing
increased rates for both males
and females. And with these
latest results, we see really,
really large increases for women
in particular and a closing
of that gender gap, as the
female rates starts to be closer
to the male rate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That women try
more, but men succeed more? Is
that one of the...
(CROSSTALK)
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD: Well, I
think that's something that is
true.
There is much more of a nonfatal
to fatal ratio for females.
There are many more attempted
self-harms that don't result in
fatal incidents. But now we see
-- with this new trend, we
see the rates getting closer,
and we also see a change in the
method, so that we see
this increasing adoption of
suffocation or hanging as a
suicide method by both males
and females, and that is
a highly lethal method.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And compare
that to guns, which is probably
still the number one...
(CROSSTALK)
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD: Guns is the
most lethal means of suicide.
And guns is the most important
method for males. But we saw for
both males and females
an increase in suffocation
as a share of suicides.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
things to keep in mind that, are
suicides unreported, because
it looks like these CDC numbers
would have to come with the
coroner's said suicide on
the death certificate?
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD: There is
probably some underreporting of
suicides, but I think that,
over this time period, I don't
believe this is any kind of a
data artifact.
I don't think that
underreporting has been a huge
part of the problem or that's
changed
a lot over the last 15 years, so
I think this is a real trend in
suicide.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And is there
any way to capture, well,
unsuccessful suicides, attempts
or hospitalizations?
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD: Oh, yes.
When people attempt suicide,
many times, it results in an
emergency room admission, so
we do have a lot of data on
nonfatal attempts. A lot of
those attempts are done with
poisoning.
That's probably the most common
method for nonfatal attempts.
And we do find that females vs.
males, as we already mentioned,
have a higher ratio
of non-fatal to fatal attempts,
because they tend to use less
lethal methods. And we also
see, for certain age groups,
like younger groups in
particular, there's more
nonfatal
attempts.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is that
because younger people are doing
this more impulsively than
older people?
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD: Well, there
is -- yes, there is a lot of
evidence that, among younger
people, suicidal behavior,
whether it's fatal or nonfatal,
has a more impulsive
origination.
So, it could be a response --
and this is I think something
that is true especially
for young males -- response to
some kind of adverse event,
maybe a relationship problem,
a fight with an authority
figure, problem with parents,
maybe a minor legal infraction.
So we see a lot of suicides --
suicide attempts and completed
suicides for younger people
that -- especially males, that
are the result of sort of recent
crises that sort of precipitate
impulsive self-injury.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Are there
large-scale patterns that you
can say are maybe attributed to
the
economy or the great recession
that we just went through, or
when people are down in the
dumps, they have lost their
fortunes, they have lost
everything? Are these the times
where we see suicides pick up?
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD: Well,
that's really the thing that we
focused on when we looked at
the middle-aged. And we did look
to see, could we associate any
particular kind of circumstances
to this rising rate of suicide
among the middle-aged?
And sure enough we did see an
increasing reference to things
like job problems, personal
finance
issues, foreclosures,
bankruptcies, things that really
accelerated during this time of
the recession, but we see that
those trends are kind of
persisting even when a lot of
people feel like the economy's
recovered quite a bit, but maybe
those improvements aren't
being felt by everybody.
And the middle-aged, I think,
are particularly vulnerable to
those kinds of pressures,
because
they are breadwinners, they have
dependents, their own retirement
might not be secure,
they might have children to put
through college. So I think they
can be particularly affected
by those kinds of
economic problems.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Are there
reasons that explain what is
happening with younger people,
teenagers?
I know there are small cohorts
from 13 to 18 and so forth, the
way that the CDC breaks
out the numbers, but when you
look at overall number, it's
increasing.
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD: Well,
that's particularly troubling,
because it's a little bit harder
to pin those kinds of increases
to the broader kinds of
economic, you know, pocketbook
issues
that are more -- you would think
have more of an impact on older
people that had those
kinds of responsibilities.
So, I think that is something
that people are very concerned
about and want to understand
better, what are
those motivations?
HARI SREENIVASAN: And is
there a contagion effect?
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD: You know,
some people have talked about
that.
You know, I think that is
extremely difficult to have
really rigorous evidence to
either
support or refute the idea of
some kind of contagion,
particularly to say that that
would
account for a large share of
suicide, but I do think that
there are sort of waxes and
wanes and times in which suicide
may come to seem more sort of
culturally acceptable
or a more popular way to talk
about a response to problems.
And this can sort of kind of
rise and fall over time and go
in and out of favor with
certain groups. And I think
adolescents can be susceptible
to that kind of language and
imagery.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Katherine Hempstead from the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation,
thanks
so much.
KATHERINE HEMPSTEAD: Sure. It's
a pleasure. Thanks for having me
on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Virginia Governor
Terry McAuliffe signed a
sweeping order today to restore
voting
rights to more than 200,000
convicted felons after their
release from prison.
Republicans in the commonwealth
quickly accused the governor of
abusing his executive power
to help Democrat Hillary Clinton
win a battleground state.
Governor McAuliffe joins
me now from Richmond.
Governor, welcome.
Why the decision to overturn
something that's been in place
in your state since the Civil
War?
GOV. TERRY MCAULIFFE (D),
Virginia: Well, let's be honest.
We have had a bad history
here on voting rights in
Virginia. 1901, 1902, they put
in the poll tax. They put in
literacy
tests. And they had a horrible
disenfranchisement for felons.
So, what I did today was to
erase 114, 115 years of a
really, really repressive tactic
used to deprive people
their right to vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You included
convicted felons who were
accused of violent crimes,
murder,
rape. You didn't make any
exceptions. Why not?
GOV. TERRY MCAULIFFE:
No. Why should I?
Once you have served your time,
once you have paid your debt to
society, the judge, jury
have determined what your
sentence would be, once you
complete that, why should you
not
be back in?
When these people, even if they
have committed heinous crimes,
but once they have finished
serving their sentence, they go
back to their communities, they
get jobs, they have family
members. You want them, Judy --
I want everybody back getting a
job. I want them paying taxes.
I want them feeling
good about themselves.
You have paid your
debt to society.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As you just
heard, the Republican Party in
your state is questioning why
you
did this blanket change in the
law, in what was the law for so
long, and they're saying
it's an example of political
opportunism, that you have got
this election coming up,
and that explains
the timing of it.
GOV. TERRY MCAULIFFE: Well,
Judy, let me be very clear.
If I were to do it for political
purposes, I would have done it
last year, before my
entire 140-member of the General
Assembly. As you know, you
follow the news, I worked
very hard to win one Senate seat
to get control of the Senate. If
I were to do this for political
purposes, I would have
done it last year.
First of all, let me be very
clear. Hillary Clinton doesn't
need this. She is going to
win Virginia. She is going to
beat Donald Trump. So, put the
politics aside. And it's
really unfortunate these
Republicans always default to
partisan politics.
This was, morally, the right
thing to do. This was about
letting people who have already
served their sentence, they are
done with probation, back in as
full citizens of our
society. That's
what we should do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor --
Governor, let me ask you about
another argument that's made,
and this is a conservative
argument. The gentleman we
spoke, his name Roger Clegg, he
heads the
Center for Equal Opportunity.
He said re-enfranchisement,
letting people vote again, it
makes sense on a case-by-case
basis, once a person can show
that they have actually turned
over a new leaf, changed their
behavior. But he said, when you
grant this sort of right to vote
to everybody, you are
not allowing the -- each
individual to show whether they
have respect for the law.
And he makes the point. He says,
you can't demand the right --
what basically you're
doing is giving the right to
vote to people who would be then
determining other people's
votes, other people's laws,
which is what you do when you
vote.
GOV. TERRY MCAULIFFE:
Oh, Judy, that's silly.
First of all, let me be clear.
I'm restoring voting rights. I'm
not giving people back
gun rights. I'm not commuting
anyone's sentence. I am giving
people who are now -- have
served
-- they have paid their debt to
society. That debt was
determined by a judge and a
jury.
And they said, this is
the debt to pay back.
Once you have done that, I'm
saying you can come back and be
part of society. You can
go back, and you can have a job,
you can buy a home, you can do
everything else. I want
you feeling good about
yourself and voting.
So, we have a difference of
opinion. I was proud to do this
today. It was morally the
right thing to do. I have the
full legal authority under the
Constitution to do it, the legal
authority. I have the moral
authority. And I did it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just finally,
Governor, you have said today, I
believe, that you want
to encourage these individuals
to register and vote. How are
you going to do that?
GOV. TERRY MCAULIFFE: Well, I
think by coming on your show,
and I think we're going to see
an awful lot of press
that came off it today.
Judy, if you could have been
with me -- and we didn't tell
anybody what we were doing
today. We invited a lot of folks
from restoration of rights
community, because I have done a
lot of these events. They didn't
know. When I announced what I
was doing today, the folks
who came up to me and said,
Governor, I haven't voted in 20
years or 30 -- there were
mothers
crying. There were fathers
crying. There were sons and
daughters crying.
It was a great feeling. I
restored the rights a couple
months ago of Bobby Blevins. He
had
not voted for 60 years. He made
a mistake when he was 19 years
old. He is now 79. And
to see this grown man standing
next to me weeping in tears when
I signed the order,
and he got to vote -- and then
he called me after he got to
vote in the last election.
You know what? That's what
leadership is all about. As
governor, my job is to grow an
economy.
My job is to make sure that
everybody can enjoy a great
life. What I did today was
morally
the right thing to do. I gave
people back their voting rights,
plain and simple.
You served your time, come on
in, be part of the Virginia
economy. Be part of our family.
And you can't do it if you treat
people like second-class
citizens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Terry
McAuliffe of the Commonwealth of
Virginia, we thank you
very much.
GOV. TERRY MCAULIFFE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
And now to the analysis of
Shields and Brooks. That's
syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist
David Brooks.
Welcome to you, gentlemen.
So, we just heard, David, from
Governor McAuliffe of Virginia.
He has decided, as we just
heard,
to allow 200 -- in effect,
200,000 ex-felons, people who
served their time for a felony
crime, to vote. What
do you make of it?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I would love
to see the ideological breakdown
of ex-felons.
But I think it's the right thing
to do. I have never quite
understood. You know, you're
assigned a cost you have to pay
for committing a crime or even a
felony. You do your time,
you do your parole, you do your
probation, you should be able to
rejoin society in full
measure.
One of the weird things in our
whole criminal just system is,
we have got people who are
50, and 60, well past what they
call criminal menopause, and
they're perfectly upstanding
citizens, and they're not the
person they were at 19, and yet
we continue to punish
them.
And whether they're in jail, we
should be more lenient on them.
If they're out, we should
make them full citizens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I agree.
And I thought Terry McAuliffe,
who is accused of being a super
salesman, a huckster, whatever,
I thought he was quite
persuasive in his case that,
especially in Virginia's long
history
of denying the vote to people
persistently, as part of
governmental policy, given the
historical record.
And once a person has paid his
or her debt to society and is
off parole, I mean, why
not? And don't we want them to
become part of society again and
the community?
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean,
apparently, there are more and
more states that are doing this.
And a lot of the questions...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, and a lot of
red states, too, so, you know,
the whole political question.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So let's move too
the presidential contest and
surprise -- David, I want to ask
you about Donald Trump.
The Republicans are meeting in
Florida, the RNC, the Republican
National Committee. Yesterday
-- or I guess last night,
Trump's campaign manager, Paul
Manafort, in a closed-door
session,
said -- and we -- some of this
was recorded, so we know that he
said it -- that, in effect,
that what Donald Trump has been
doing has been acting,
play-acting, and he's going to
be changing his tune, and you're
going to see a different Donald
Trump, and he's going
to raise money for Republicans.
What do you make of this?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, first, the
RNC gathering, from what one can
tell, it's like the gathering
of the Russian royal
family in 1916.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: They seem to have
no spine, no argument. All they
want is, they don't
want the show in Cleveland to be
bad. And so as long as the show
is good, we can have
a disastrous royal candidate
who will destroy the party.
And so they're fine as long as
there is no bad drama. And so
they're laying down. And
Reince Priebus will go down as
one of the worst RNC heads for
what he -- how he's behaved
this year.
Second, as for Donald Trump and
what Paul Manafort said, A, it's
not credible. Donald
Trump has been Donald Trump for
a long, long time. He is not
going to stop being himself.
And that a voluble, large, loud,
and sometimes obnoxious and
sometimes appalling campaigner.
He's not going to turn
presidential, because he lacks
the gravitas, he lacks the
knowledge
base and he lacks the core. And
yet now he has hired this guy
Paul Manafort who's saying,
oh, don't worry, he's not some
kind of blowhard, he just a rank
opportunist who's been putting
on a show all this time.
So, I don't -- I don't -- A,
don't think it's going to work,
and I don't think it's
particularly
attractive either.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, what
do you think? Is it...
MARK SHIELDS: I think it's
quite attractive. I really do.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, I think the
Republican Party chair's
responsibility, any party chair,
is not to give the party a
candidate. It's to give the
candidate a party.
And if the voters choose
otherwise, it's really not the
chairman's credit or fault, the
voters'
decision. The voters have made
their decision. And I think
that's what we're seeing both
in Florida and in the Republican
Party generally. There is a
sense of inevitability.
It was such a crushing victory
that Trump won on Tuesday in New
York. And when Ted Cruz,
the would-be alternative,
finishes a distant third, so far
out of the race, he's no longer
a plausible candidate himself.
He's just a vehicle to stop
Trump.
And it looks like Indiana is the
last shot. I mean, Donald -- let
Trump be Trump. Donald
Trump has been this unbridled
person who has been -- totally
contradicted himself. His
positions on issues, Judy, are
like the footprints at the
seashore's edge. They change
with the
tide.
They're there today. They're
gone tomorrow. And it obviously
hasn't bothered them. It's
a personal choice on voters'
parts. And now he's going to
make a serious policy decision
-- speech, rather, on gender and
foreign policy. And, you know, I
think we will just continue
to see new Trumps
from here forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you
mentioned a changing position.
He was -- one of the things that
he said in the -- I guess it was
on "The Today Show" yesterday,
David, was -- he was asked
about this North Carolina LGBT
law, the public -- using public
bathrooms.
And he basically said the
Republican governor shouldn't
have changed the law, that he
should
have left way it was. And now
conservatives, Ted Cruz and
others, are coming back to say,
this is not the
Republican position.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
So, that law is so bad, now I
have to praise Donald Trump.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: And so he's right.
I mean, he made the obvious
point. Is this really a problem
here? Like, are there a lot
of bathrooms at North Carolina
where people are scared to go
in? I don't think this is
a problem. This is -- this is
1980s socially conservative
culture war politics. Pick some
issue that seems like something
changing in the sexual
revolution and try to mobilize
the conservative base on the
basis of it. That's what it is.
And Donald Trump, to his credit,
doesn't play that game. He has
moved on, as the Republican
Party should have moved on.
He's playing a different game.
And so, to his credit, he's not
playing that game. Now, it
should be said, people are
saying,
oh, he's socially moderate. He's
socially moderate, but not in
the way liberal Republicans
are socially moderate or
moderate Republicans are.
He's socially moderate in a
populist way, which is a
different sort of moderation,
but
he does end up moderate on a lot
of social issues. And to his
credit, he's just not stuck
in the culture war. He is not
stuck in Jerry Falwell lands.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, we should
note, President Obama over in
London today in a news
conference,
Mark, no surprise, criticized
the North Carolina law.
But what -- you said a minute
ago that Trump -- or I thought
you said Trump is inevitable
now. Is that really...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I think there is a
growing sense of inevitability.
I mean, he's going to sweep
the Northeast. So, now you're
left with John Kasich, who's won
one state and has had two
semi-weak seconds in New
Hampshire and New York, and a
lot of wonderful editorials, and
fawning praise from many in the
press. But there isn't anybody
standing between him and
the nomination, except
him, which he is.
On the North Carolina thing,
Judy, it reminds me of the furor
-- remember Phyllis Schlafly
leading the charge about unisex
bathrooms, how they were a
threat to Western civilization.
She had obviously never
been in an airplane.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Or, if she did,
she must have been uncomfortable
on long flights.
And this is a solution without a
problem. And, politically, where
Trump shows a certain
shrewdness is, he's come down on
the smart -- not only the right
side, the enlightened
side, the smart side
politically. The business
community has moved as one
against this sort
of thing.
And Governor Pat McCrory, the
Republican incumbent in North
Carolina, is now trailing in the
latest Elon college poll Roy
Cooper, the Democratic attorney
general, and his job rating has
fallen
to its lowest point, as a
consequence in large part,
according to the pollsters, of
this
whole brouhaha.
DAVID BROOKS: Could I just pick
up on the Trump evitability?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sure, yes.
DAVID BROOKS: I think he's
evitable, not inevitable.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Because
it's likely...
JUDY WOODRUFF: We like it
when you make up words.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I
just chopped them up.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: He's likely
to get the nomination.
But you should go back to these
delegate numbers. He still --
people have factored in the New
York victory. He is going to do
well in Pennsylvania, Maryland,
Connecticut, all these states.
Indiana,
we're not sure. There's a poll
that shows him up, but the
polling is bad in Indiana.
It's hard to reach people
because of state law.
But say Cruz does well in
Indiana, and then say Cruz does
well in California, which is
possible. And Trump would really
need a pretty significant
percentage of the delegates to
get over the top. And if you
look at the smartest analysis of
people who are breaking down --
there's
a guy named Sean Trende at
RealClearPolitics who is
breaking it down like
congressional
district by
congressional district.
He has him coming close, but,
and best-case scenario, getting
a majority of the delegates,
but easily not getting, easily
coming up short, and that --
maybe he can buy enough
delegates
to get over the top but there is
still a significant, even a
50/50 chance he doesn't quite
get the
delegates there. And
then he has to scramble.
MARK SHIELDS: I just want to
say, I defer to Sean Trende on
his knowledge of congressional
districts and the politics.
What I said was, there was a
growing sense of inevitability.
I think the wind is going
to out of the sails of the
anybody-but-Trump movement.
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two quick other
things I have to ask you. Is
Bernie Sanders -- he didn't
do well in the state he was born
in, Mark, in New York. Hillary
Clinton won by 16 points.
What does Bernie Sanders want
right now, and can he get it?
MARK SHIELDS: Hillary Clinton
won a smashing victory in New
York. And I think she has a
clear path to the nomination.
Bernie Sanders has made history.
He will leave this campaign,
when he does, as the major
leader of a national movement.
He has changed the whole ethos
of the Democratic Party. The
Democratic Party had argued, we
have to take big money, because,
otherwise, we're unilaterally
disarmed.
This is a man who, with seven
million individual
contributions, has outraised
Hillary Clinton
with $182 million, and running
on issues of economic justice,
of inequality, of controlling
the banks. So, saying that the
message of representing the
small people, the message
of Franklin Roosevelt, Teddy
Roosevelt, the malefactors of
great wealth driving the money
changers out of the temples of
civilization, is all of a sudden
current and vital and relevant,
it's an amazing achievement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're saying the
Democratic Party has changed?
MARK SHIELDS: I think Bernie
Sanders has given every Democrat
-- has robbed them of the excuse
that we have to take big money,
we have to sort of mute our
social economic values message
just in order to mollify those
guys who write the big checks,
that there's an alternative
move.
And I think he's changed that
dialogue and the terms of the
debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that
enough for him, David?
DAVID BROOKS: I agree with Mark.
He has done that. It's not
enough for him. He's not going
to win the nomination. He just
doesn't have the delegates.
I do think, if he continues to
fight -- and I don't think it's
likely -- the way he fought
in New York, he will end up
hurting his own movement. It
will end up seeing, oh, it
wasn't
about the causes, it was about
Bernie, because, A, the highly
confrontational style he took
in New York didn't work.
And, B, it will really begin to
do damage to their nominee.
Hillary Clinton is now having
to spend a lot of money in
places like New York and
Pennsylvania and California that
she will not need to spend money
in the fall, but she's having to
do that because he's pressing
her in those places.
And he will begin to -- if he
keeps fighting, it will really
begin to drain her and it will
sour the mood around
him, I think.
MARK SHIELDS: I
disagree. I really do.
I think she's a better candidate
when she's in a competitive
situation. I think the New
York campaign was New York
values. That's the kind of thing
New York races that we're
used to. Whether it was for --
it didn't bring out him at his
best. He made the mistake of
thinking he was going to win and
saying he was going to win.
He should have played it as the
underdog. But I think he has not
made this a personal
campaign. He's never brought up
Bill Clinton's $500,000
speeches, 11 of them given to
foreign
audiences while she was
secretary of state. He hasn't
charged her of being part of the
1 percent and
living in a bubble.
He hasn't -- really has been on
the issues of economic loyalty
and on economic concentration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have about 10
seconds left, no time to ask you
about the new currency.
I think you both probably think
it's too soon to put a woman on
our new bills, right, the
$20, the $10, and the $5.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: They're not
serious about this, are they?
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will
talk about it next week.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Thanks
for that, Judy.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: David
Brooks, Mark Shields.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what it will take to save
Alabama's largest river delta;
and paying tribute to the
music legend Prince.
But first: The U.S. is stepping
up its campaign in Somalia
against the terror group
Al-Shabaab,
but that fight will not be won
unless U.S. allies like Kenya
and others intensify their
efforts.
In January, there was a big
setback to the mission, when
more than 100 Kenyan troops
died on their base in Somalia, a
result of Al-Shabaab's deadliest
attack ever.
Last week, the group released a
video of the operation. Now,
with the help of the Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting,
special correspondent Nick
Schifrin looks at how Al-Shabaab
is winning
both on the ground and
over the airwaves.
A warning: Some viewers may find
images in this story disturbing.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It is 48 minutes
of violence, video game
graphics, and visions of
victory.
The video is pure propaganda,
full of fancy editing and
half-truths. But it's effective
at portraying Shabaab as
strong and Kenya as weak.
What do you see when
you watch this video?
CLINT WATTS, Former FBI
Investigator: The first thing
that you notice is, number one,
how many people they have moving
against this defensive position.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Clint Watts is a
former U.S. soldier and FBI
investigator. He's now a Shabaab
expert.
CLINT WATTS: So, Kenyan forces
just getting annihilated here by
what is a seemingly ragtag
group that was put
together on short notice.
If you were with a competent
force, just like you see here in
this video with this vehicle
running away, they should be
able to stand right there and
eliminate that entire force
moving through the open.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It was the
deadliest day in Kenyan military
history.
They were vulnerable, not only
because of poor defenses, but
also because they haven't
been on the offense.
CLINT WATTS: Any troops that are
out there just parked as sort of
a occupy and hope that
peace will come are always
going to be vulnerable.
NICK SCHIFRIN: African Union
troops pushed Shabaab out of its
strongholds five years
ago. Since then, the troops have
mostly remained in their bases.
That's allowed Shabaab to launch
daily attacks and resurge.
LT. COL. EMMANUEL CHIRCHIR,
Kenyan Army: That particular
pause gave Al-Shabaab to regain
its balance.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Kenyan Lieutenant
Colonel Emmanuel Chirchir was
the chief spokesman against
Shabaab.
In the El Adde attack,
he lost his brother Dan.
LT. COL. EMMANUEL CHIRCHIR: I
hear some people believe that,
when they die, they will meet
virgins. That's what Al-Shabaab
believe. When Dan died, he met
God.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Dan Chirchir died
instantly. His funeral was held
with military honors.
Shabaab has attacked bases
before, but never with a car
bomb that exploded inside a base
for African Union troops,
known as AMISOM.
LT. COL. EMMANUEL CHIRCHIR: It's
a new experience, a new
challenge that AMISOM forces are
facing
as a whole.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In response to
Shabaab's resurgence, the U.S.
military has dramatically's
escalated
its own attacks. In just the
last seven weeks, U.S.
airstrikes and U.S.-backed
ground assaults
have killed at least 190
Al-Shabaab fighters, more than
the total killed in the previous
nine years.
CLINT WATTS: The Kenyans have
taken a huge hit. You have got
to somehow back them up
and give them some reason to
believe that they're going to be
OK.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The U.S. now
calls these attacks
self-defense, because they
target Shabaab
fighters massing and presumably
preparing for an attack.
General David Rodriguez is the
U.S.' top soldier in Africa.
GEN. DAVID RODRIGUEZ, U.S.
Africa Command: They disperse
and attack and focus all that
energy on one of the
forward operation bases.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But the previous
decade's worth of American
strikes couldn't prevent this
horror. In fact, the Al-Shabaab
brigade that carried out the
attack is named after a Kenyan
Al-Shabaab commander killed
by a U.S. drone in 2009.
In Somalia, were you winning
most of the battles?
This man, whom we granted
anonymity, is a former member of
the same unit. He says
Al-Shabaab
would be losing if African
forces were more aggressive.
MAN (through translator): Most
of the time, we would look at
the enemy's strength and
leave. If a town was taken from
us, it was tough to retake it,
since they had aerial
support.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Which is why the
U.S. is pushing and training
African troops to attack more.
LT. COL. EMMANUEL CHIRCHIR: So,
it becomes a kind of competition
in ensuring that you
are ahead of the enemy. And if
you are ahead of the enemy, you
will reduce this kind of
-- any kind of threat.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But the video's
threat is also as a recruitment
tool to lure susceptible
young men.
CLINT WATTS: You can watch this
as a potential recruit and be
like, I am going to be this
guy on the battlefield. This is
something that excites me. And
I'm with my brothers
out here. And it's violent and
they're successful. So I want to
be part of a winning effort.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Did you like the
feeling of fighting with
al-Shabaab against the African
forces?
MAN (through translator): It was
good. We were like brothers. In
the beginning, my morale
was high.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Shabaab
reinforces that by forcing
Kenyan soldiers to portray
themselves
as the losers.
MAN (through translator): We
were attacked and overrun by the
Muslims. They have defeated
us.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In response, the
African Union released its own
video showing the El Adde
village recaptured.
NAKIBUS LAKARA, AMISOM: AMISOM
is not a peacekeeping mission.
AMISOM is a war-fighting
mission.
So, from deployment, you
know you have come to fight.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But Shabaab uses
that same video to mock Kenya's
public relations attempts.
NAKIBUS LAKARA: So, from
deployment, you know you have
come to fight.
MAN: We will fight them
deep in their hideouts.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Pointing out
Kenya's refusal, even to this
day, to release a death toll.
Even Kenyans who support the
troops make the same exact
critique.
BONIFACE MWANGI, Anti-Corruption
Campaigner: Right now, what we
have now is propaganda
from Al-Shabaab. What we need is
the truth from the government.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Boniface Mwangi
is an anti-corruption
campaigner. He held a vigil for
the El Adde
victims, but criticized the
government for withholding
details about how they died.
BONIFACE MWANGI: We are
celebrating the people who died,
and asking the generals and the
commander in chief, what really
happened in Somalia? Tell us the
truth.
NICK SCHIFRIN: As long as Kenya
declines to tell its side of the
story, Al-Shabaab wins
the battle and the
propaganda war.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Nick Schifrin in Nairobi.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This was an Earth
Day that got more attention than
many past, due in
part to today's signing of
the global climate accord.
But for all of the celebrations
surrounding that, there's still
major concerns about what's
happening to the environment
and the impact of development.
That tension is playing out here
in Alabama, with one of the
country's preeminent naturalists
calling for the creation of a
new protected area to cover a
critical waterway.
Jeffrey Brown has our report.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Mobile-Tensaw
Delta, where five rivers meet in
Southern Alabama to drain
into the Gulf of Mexico, more
than 200,000 acres of bog,
marsh, swampland and floodplain,
it's one of the most
biologically diverse places in
North America, home to scores of
species of flowers, birds,
fish, turtles, and more.
E.O. WILSON, Biologist: And
there are a tremendous variety
of plants and animals in it.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's also the
childhood playground of Edward
O. Wilson, where he searched out
snakes and insects, and worked
as a 14-year-old counselor at
nearby Camp Pushmataha.
E.O. WILSON: It was wartime. And
they didn't have any older,
smarter kids to be nature
counselor. So, I just simply led
the boys through the whole
summer on expeditions searching
and capturing snakes. We built
up a fantastic collection of
different species of snakes.
And thus was born the
naturalist, and thus was born
the professor.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the
world's best-known professors, a
leading biologist and
naturalist,
and a two-time Pulitzer
Prize-winning author.
Now 86, Wilson's quest is to
preserve the diversity of life
on the Earth, including
here in the delta, where he and
others have been lobbying for
the creation of a new national
park.
BILL FINCH, Botanist: This is
golden club. It's just one of
the beautiful flowers. It's
really a peculiar
flower, isn't it?
JEFFREY BROWN: Working with
Wilson on the park effort, and
joining us in the Hurricane
Bayou recently, was writer
and botanist Bill Finch.
BILL FINCH: It's a beautiful
spring day here on the Gulf
Coast.
JEFFREY BROWN: Among his many
roles, Finch hosts a Sunday
morning call-in radio show
in Mobile to talk nature,
gardening and the delta.
BILL FINCH: We will talk about,
what is the future of this
delta? What is the future of
Mobile Bay? Will it still be
here in a few years for us?
JEFFREY BROWN: Working in the
delta's favor, Finch says, is
its sheer size and power. The
water is simply too wild to do
any major building here.
Moreover, the state government
has already
protected tens of thousands of
acres through its Forever Wild
Land Trust, which uses taxes
on oil drilling to purchase
conservation lands.
BILL FINCH: We have done great
work protecting this floodplain.
JEFFREY BROWN: In
where we are now?
BILL FINCH: Where we are now.
The land wasn't expensive. It
wasn't hard to purchase. But not
everything lives in the
floodplain. And even the turtles
who live here require the dry
land. What we have done
a terrible job of is preserving
the areas where people can
develop, the areas that are
dryer than this.
JEFFREY BROWN: Finch and Wilson
took us to an area that has been
protected, Splinter
Hill Bog.
BILL FINCH: This is a leaf that
is meant to look like a flower.
JEFFREY BROWN: Home to
carnivorous flowers like these
pitcher plants, which use decoy
flowers to trap their prey.
BILL FINCH: And the insects
crawl in and can't get back out.
JEFFREY BROWN: The bog also
contains a longleaf pine forest,
which Finch says is vital
habitat
for bears and other species.
But this is a relatively small
area, and Finch's real concern
is development, which, among
other things, replaces soil,
plants and natural water ecology
with concrete and asphalt,
sending
mud and debris rushing into the
delta, clouding the water and
killing plant and animal life.
So what do you want to see?
What kind of federal...
BILL FINCH: You know,
there's lots of ways.
We have tried to do it alone as
a state. We have tried to get
some federal money. But
there's lots of opportunities
for getting more federal support
for what we're doing,
and for getting federal
attention for one of the most
diverse areas in North America.
And so, you know, the National
Park Service provides some
opportunities for that.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 2013, the
Mobile County Commission
endorsed a plan to study the
impact
of a national park. But even
that has drawn opposition.
WOMAN: If we give the federal
government the power to protect
the delta, they are subject
to abusing it.
MERCERIA LUDGOOD, Mobile County
Commissioner: Didn't grow up
fishing or in boats. And -- but
when I became a commissioner,
this was part of my district.
JEFFREY BROWN: Merceria Ludgood
is a Mobile county commissioner
who favors the study,
but knows that many of her
constituents will be wary of
going further.
MERCERIA LUDGOOD: You will have
the people on the one side who
don't know anything about
the delta, its environmental
implications for quality of life
here. All they see is,
we need a job.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
MERCERIA LUDGOOD: And so the
conversation then gets
fractured, and you have the
people
who want development, who want
the jobs on one side, and the
environmentalists on the
other side. And what we have got
to find is a way to marry that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Opposition in
this deeply conservative state
also comes from suspicions of
any federal
intervention, especially one
that could limit hunting and
fishing, sports popular in the
delta.
CHRIS ELLIOTT, Baldwin County
Commissioner: The short answer
for why not a national park
here is, it's not necessary.
JEFFREY BROWN: Chris Elliott is
a commissioner in Baldwin
County, across from Mobile and
home to many new housing and
commercial developments.
CHRIS ELLIOTT: The people of
South Alabama have traditionally
opposed increased federal
government oversight over our
areas. And we just don't think
it's necessary here in South
Alabama. We're doing a fine job
protecting this natural resource
on our own.
JEFFREY BROWN: He points to
efforts like the state's Forever
Wild Land Trust, as well as
to local agencies like the
Mobile Bay Estuaries Program,
which in this large subdivision
has
been working to mitigate storm
water drainage problems caused
by poor planning in the 1970s.
ROBERTA SWANN, Director, Mobile
Bay National Estuary Program:
You can't just go in and
restore a stream. You have to
strengthen its ability to handle
those larger quantities
of storm water runoff.
JEFFREY BROWN: Roberta Swann is
director of the estuaries
effort.
ROBERTA SWANN: This is not a
natural stream restoration. This
is an enhanced stream
restoration.
There are rocks in here that are
not native. And the reason why
it's not a true stream
restoration is because we have
to accommodate the impacts of
humans on the environment.
If we...
JEFFREY BROWN: Because
that's inevitable.
ROBERTA SWANN: It's inevitable.
And if we were to turn the delta
into a national park,
we would lose the ability to
mitigate the human impacts on
that ecosystem.
JEFFREY BROWN: Agreement on the
need to protect a precious
natural resource, but vast
differences
on how to do it.
E.O. WILSON: That was part of
the story of how many species
you can get packed into a
small area.
BILL FINCH: Get packed in there.
JEFFREY BROWN: Bill Finch and
Edward Wilson want to limit some
development, but see a
potential compromise with
hunters and fishers in a
National Wildlife Refuge
designation
that would still allow
those sports to continue.
BILL FINCH: There are a lot of
options out there that we can
explore that allow us to
have it all in many ways, to do
the things we're doing now, to
have the kind of careful
human use of the delta that we
have got now, but still preserve
our biodiversity.
JEFFREY BROWN: And for Ed
Wilson, finding a way to protect
the delta of his youth is
part of a much larger goal of
setting aside half the Earth for
habitat, one which begins
with a lesson in humility.
E.O. WILSON: There are about two
million species known worldwide
of all kinds of organisms.
And the total number of species
is probably close to 10 million
worldwide, meaning we
have only discovered, much less
studied, about 20 percent of all
the species. So, here is
a world that is waiting for
exploration, and that's just the
beginning.
JEFFREY BROWN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Jeffrey Brown in
the Mobile-Tensaw River Delta.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Remembrances
continued to pour in today for
singer and songwriter Prince,
who died yesterday at
his home in Minnesota.
Even President Obama paused to
reflect on the superstar's
legacy during his news
conference
in London.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: He put out great
music and he was a great
performer.
It's a remarkable loss. And I'm
staying at Winfield House, the
U.S. ambassador's residence.
It so happens our ambassador has
a turntable, and so this
morning, we played "Purple Rain"
and "Delirious" just to get
warmed up before we left the
house for important bilateral
meetings like this.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Obama's
tribute was one of many from
friends and fans alike.
Here's a collection.
From the New Orleans Superdome,
to San Francisco's City Hall,
landmarks across the country lit
up in Prince's signature color
purple last night to honor the
iconic musician. But, for
many, remembering the superstar
meant celebrating the songs that
were his life's work.
In Minnesota, thousands flooded
into downtown Minneapolis to
dance the night away outside
the nightclub where his movie
"Purple Rain" was filmed, while,
in New York, hundreds turned
out for a street party hosted by
filmmaker and Prince friend
Spike Lee.
Over on Broadway, tributes
flowed from fellow singers and
musicians. The cast of the smash
hit "Hamilton" danced to
Prince's "Let's Go Crazy" after
their curtain call.
And at the nearby at the Bernard
B. Jacobs Theatre, actress
Jennifer Hudson led the cast
of "The Color Purple" in a
rendition of one of the singer's
most iconic melodies.
Prince died yesterday at age 57.
And the tributes go on.
On the "NewsHour" online: Spicy
fish with couscous and fried
zucchini with mint aren't
dishes normally associated with
Italian cuisine, but these
delicacies are quintessential
for
Roman Jews, who have lived in
the Italian capital for
centuries. As the holiday of
Passover
begins tonight, we talked to the
authors of the new book "Tasting
Rome." They gave us
two kosher recipes perfect
for a family celebration.
You can find them on our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs from our PBS
colleagues. Later tonight on
"Washington Week": Republicans
prepare for a brokered
convention, President Obama
repairs
relations with Saudi Arabia, and
female faces are coming to U.S.
paper bills.
On "PBS NewsHour" Saturday:
Local governments and private
industry are striking deals to
get infrastructure projects
under way. But are they a good
deal for taxpayers? Hear more
from Virginia's Governor Terry
McAuliffe on one such deal in
his state. That's tomorrow
on "PBS NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday with a look at how
Nepal is coping one year after
a devastating earthquake.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.
END